We haven’t yet refuted Hume’s argument—we’ve only taken the first step towards doing so. Hume could defend his view against what we’ve said thus by far by saying the following: 

(HR) Suppose that, to explain why all phi’s thus far known are psi’s, you posit some underlying structure or law that disposes phi’s to be psi’s. Unless you think that nature is uniform, you have no right to expect that connection to continue to hold. But if, in order to deal with this, you suppose that nature is uniform, then you’re caught in the vicious circle that I described.

HR is correct. One is indeed caught in a vicious circle if, in order to show the legitimacy of inductive inference, one assumes UP; and the reason is that, just as Hume says, UP can be known, if at all, only on inductive grounds.
 
4.1. Why inductive inferences don’t presuppose the truth of the uniformity principle
But in making an inductive inference, one doesn’t assume UP and, moreover, one doesn’t assume anything that, like UP, can be known only on inductive grounds. What one assumes is that explanations are supposed to eliminate causal anomalies—that they are supposed to reduce the number of them and to limit the scope of those that aren’t eliminated. What one assumes, then, is that it is inherent in the very concept of explanation that, other things being equal, T1 is a better explanation than T2 if T1 does a better job of eliminating causal anomalies than T2.
The purpose of explanation is to minimize the breadth and depth of what must be taken for granted. The more a proposed theory requires you to say: “things just happen that way; there’s no explaining it,” the less successful an explanation it is.
Here’s an illustration. On Monday night, you park your car in the usual place, viz. right in front of your house, which is in a quiet residential neighborhood. As usual, you make sure that you lock the car and turn the car alarm on. You also put an almost, but not quite, indestructible device (popularly known as “The Club”) on the steering-wheel that locks it into place, making the car undriveable. Given where your home is in relation to where the car is parked, you’d almost certainly hear the car alarm go off, were it to do so. In fact, unless you were fast asleep, you’d even hear the footsteps of someone approaching the car. So even if the car alarm weren’t on, you might well hear the approach of a would-be thief and you’d certainly hear the noises made by somebody who, not having the keys needed to open the car or to unlock the steering wheel or to start the car, would have to jimmy the door lock, saw through the wheel lock, etc.
As it happens, you hear nothing all night. And you know that you didn’t sleep any more deeply than usual—that, for example, you weren’t in a particularly deep drug-induced slumber—and, in general, that you weren’t made less sensitive to noise than you usually are. (For argumentative purposes, we’ll set aside the question of how you know this.) Nonetheless, on Tuesday morning, the car is gone.
What are the various possible explanations of this? (By “possible,” I don’t necessarily mean “worthy of consideration,” only “not ruled out by the laws of logic.”) There are infinitely many; but here are three.

(E1) Using his or her super powers to bypass the security measures you took, some superhero-like creature made off with the car, making little or no noise and leaving few or no clues.

(E2) As you were sleeping, the laws of physics changed in such a way that hitherto noisy processes (e.g., those that occur when car alarms go off) are no longer noisy.

(E3) Your good friend Larry—who, despite his numerous convictions for auto-theft, simply radiates trustworthiness and decency, and to whom, without so much as a touch of anxiety, you therefore gave copies of all your keys—made off with the car. (For argumentative purposes, let’s assume that, given that the car is gone, it had to have been stolen; it could not, we will suppose, have been towed or simply borrowed.)

Each of E1 and E2 replaces the mystery of how your car could be noiselessly stolen with a far greater mystery. In fact, each creates a whole network of deep mysteries. E1, if correct, would generate a number of thorny questions concerning specific matters of fact and also concerning our knowledge of biological and physical law. (The features that we’d have to ascribe to the superhero in question would be ones that, unless modern biology is very wrong, a life form is most unlikely to have.) And E2, if correct, would do nothing less than create the greatest scientific mystery of all time.
E3 is not free from sin either. In general, you are a good judge of character. In any case, that’s what you believe and that’s what others tell you; and your judgments about people have generally been borne out by subsequent events. You’ve never been as convinced of anyone’s integrity as you are of Larry’s. Without being morose or censorious, he exudes a decency and centeredness that you’ve never even seen in a head of state, let alone a car thief. And although Larry’s extensive criminal background is consistent with his stealing your car, it is not, you are convinced, as consistent with it as his current excellence of character is inconsistent with it.
 
But, of course, E3 is hands down the best explanation. You may think you’re a good judge of character; but that doesn’t mean you are one. People proverbially overestimate their ability to read others. And even if you are a good judge of character, so what? Anybody can be fooled; everybody is fooled, at some point or other. And if Larry is a career criminal—which, given his rap-sheet, he may well be—then he has probably honed his skills as a con-man.
This doesn’t mean that E3 is completely innocuous. If correct, it raises the question of how somebody could seem so different from how they are. It also raises the question of how, despite being a crime expert, you could have been unwary enough to let yourself be seduced into trusting somebody who, given his background, was so obviously unworthy of trust. But these mysteries can be dealt with more easily than the mysteries created by E1–E2.
All of this goes to show that ceteris paribus the best explanation is the one that leaves us with the fewest unexplained explainers.
Of course, new theories raise questions of their own. This is almost a tautology. A new theory is, tautologously, a new way of looking at things; and a new way of looking things is, very obviously if not tautologously, one that raises new questions. But good new theories tend to facilitate the answering of the questions they raise. Relativity Theory raises questions that don’t arise for its predecessor, Newtonian mechanics. But Relativity Theory itself tends to contain hints as to how those questions are to be answered. The development of a good theory tends to consist largely in making explicit what is already present in that theory. The development of a bad theory consists in adding new material to it to help it deal with each new onslaught of counterevidence. In any case, what’s important in this context is that good theories get rid of causal gaps and they shrink the ones they can’t get rid of.
Before proceeding, we must make a certain distinction very clear. Little or nothing about the actual causal structure of the world is analytic. It isn’t analytic that there aren’t giant causal gaps in the causal structure of the world; that reality doesn’t consist of one ex nihilo event after another, that superheroes don’t suddenly pop into existence, steal cars, and then, without leaving a trace, vanish never to be heard from again. These things, if known, are known only on the basis of sense-experience. But it is analytic that, other things equal, good explanations are less dependent for their truth than bad ones on the existence of unexplained explainers. Given that E3 depends less for its truth on unexplained explainers than does any one of E1–E2, it is analytic that E3 is ceteris paribus the better explanation. 
But it isn’t analytic that E3 is correct. It’s a possibility—maybe only a bare theoretical possibility, but a possibility no less—that the laws of physics changed over night, that CIA super-agents have targeted you, that comic book characters now walk the Earth, etc. Anything’s possible. And so far as we know that E1–E2 are wrong, it’s through sense-perception. So, I repeat, it isn’t analytic that E3 is correct. But, given that it requires fewer unexplained explainers than others, it is analytic that ceteris paribus it’s the better explanation.
