EVALUATION: MULTIPLE FAILURES
Instruction: "PROVIDE A FIVE SENTENCE DEFENSE OF EACH OF FOLLOWING CLAIMS: EACH SECTION SHOULD START WITH THE CLAIM BEING DEFENDED IN QUOTATION MARKS"
Problems:

Arbitrary filtering. 52 input claims → only 25 defended. The instruction says "EACH OF FOLLOWING CLAIMS" — that means ALL 52, not a curated selection. The system invented a scoring system (95/100, 92/100, etc.) and filtering criterion that the user never requested.
Sentence count ignored. Instruction says "FIVE SENTENCE DEFENSE." The actual defenses are full paragraphs of 8-15+ sentences each. The constraint was completely disregarded.
Final Version structural breakdown. The Reconstruction (Stage 1) actually follows the format reasonably well — claims in quotes, defenses below. But the Final Version (Stage 3) collapses:

Random section headers appear that aren't verbatim claims ("Conceptual Structure and Information Transmission")
Long prose blocks without claim headers
Multiple claims merged into sprawling paragraphs
Format established in Stage 1 is not preserved through to Stage 3


Same assembly bug as before. The Final Version is still garbled — content from different processing stages appears to be concatenating incorrectly, with some formatted sections followed by unstructured prose dumps.

Root causes:

Custom instructions aren't being treated as hard constraints
Some "selection/scoring" logic is overriding the "do ALL claims" requirement
Final Version assembly still isn't preserving the structure from Reconstruction
WHICH FILE CONTAINS THE ROTTEN CODE?8:42 PMPinpointed orchestrator file as primary source of bugs.The user is asking which file contains the code responsible for these bugs. Based on the earlier conversation, Claude Code identified:

server/services/outlineFirstObjectionProof.ts — Pipeline orchestrator
server/routes.ts — Where Full Suite output gets assembled

The bugs are:

Arbitrary filtering (52 → 25 claims) — This is likely in the Reconstruction logic or a prompt that's instructing the AI to "select" or "score" claims
Sentence count ignored — This is a prompt issue, not enforcing the constraint
Final Version structural breakdown — This is the assembly/concatenation bug in either the orchestrator or routes
Assembly bug — Same as #3

The most likely culprits:

server/services/outlineFirstObjectionProof.ts — This is the pipeline orchestrator. It probably contains the prompts that are:

Adding the scoring/filtering logic
Not enforcing the "5 sentences" constraint
Assembling the final output incorrectly



The user wants a direct answer about which file to look at.server/services/outlineFirstObjectionProof.ts
That's the pipeline orchestrator. It likely contains:

The prompt that's adding the scoring/filtering logic (turning 52 claims into 25)
The prompt that's ignoring the "five sentence" constraint
The assembly logic that's breaking the Final Version structure

The custom instructions are being passed but not enforced as hard constraints in whatever prompt is driving each stage.import Anthropic from '@anthropic-ai/sdk';

interface DocumentSection {
  id: number;
  title: string;
  content: string;
  wordCount: number;
  relevantObjections: number[];
}

interface ParsedObjection {
  number: number;
  category: string;
  severity: 'devastating' | 'forceful' | 'minor';
  objepasted8:43 PMThe user prompt is empty, so I cannot provide a summary. Please provide the user's actual question or request.24sThe user shared the code from outlineFirstObjectionProof.ts. Let me analyze it to find the bugs causing:

Arbitrary filtering (52 claims → 25)
Sentence count being ignored
Final Version structural breakdown

Looking at this code, I see it's specifically for the "Objection-Proof" stage (Stage 3). This file handles:

Parsing objections from Stage 2
Creating sections from the reconstructed text
Mapping objections to sections
Rewriting each section to be "bullet-proof"

But wait - this code is about making text "objection-proof" by integrating counter-arguments. It doesn't seem to be the code that's:

Filtering 52 claims down to 25
Ignoring the "five sentence" instruction
Breaking the structure

The filtering and sentence-count issues would be happening in the Reconstruction stage (Stage 1), not in this Objection-Proof stage (Stage 3).
This file (outlineFirstObjectionProof.ts) is for Stage 3 only. The bugs the user described are happening in:

Stage 1 (Reconstruction): The filtering from 52→25 and ignoring "five sentences"
Stage 3 (Final Version): The structural breakdown

Actually, looking at the output again, the Final Version in the last test showed that:

The formatting was inconsistent
Random prose sections appeared without proper headers
The structure from Stage 1 wasn't preserved

So this file IS part of the problem for Stage 3's structural issues. But the Stage 1 issues (filtering, sentence count) would be in a different file - likely wherever the Reconstruction prompt lives.
Let me identify what THIS file does wrong for Stage 3:

The rewriteSection function has a prompt that says "START with the EXACT claim header" but it's designed for paragraph-based documents, not for the specific format required by the custom instructions.
The createDeterministicSections function fails to handle the custom document structure. It splits sections by paragraphs and searches for "Claim X:" patterns, but misses the nuanced formatting requirements.

I notice the code fundamentally misunderstands the document's unique structural needs. The parsing mechanism doesn't align with the precise formatting instructions, leading to fragmented and inconsistent section generation.
The critical breakdown occurs because the code treats the document as a generic text, not a carefully structured argument with specific formatting rules. This results in sections that lose their original intent and precision.
The investigation reveals a multi-stage problem spanning different code files. While outlineFirstObjectionProof.ts represents Stage 3, the core issues likely originate in the Stage 1 Reconstruction code, which handles initial claim filtering and structural interpretation.
The systematic breakdown suggests a need for a more sophisticated parsing approach that respects custom document instructions and maintains the integrity of the original argumentative structure.
Identifying the precise Stage 1 file - potentially routes.ts or another service module - becomes crucial for resolving the underlying data processing inconsistencies.This file handles Stage 3 (Objection-Proof Final Version) — it explains the structural breakdown in the Final Version, but NOT the main bugs.
The critical bugs are in Stage 1 (Reconstruction):

Filtering 52 claims → 25 (the scoring/selection logic)
Ignoring "FIVE SENTENCE" constraint
Not starting each section with verbatim claim in quotes

This file doesn't contain the Reconstruction prompt. The Reconstruction logic is elsewhere — likely in:

server/routes/ (a route that calls the AI for Stage 1)
Another service file
Or inline in routes.ts

Search for:

"Reconstruction"
"Position Defense" (that appeared in the output)
"Selection Criterion" (the invented filtering logic)
"Score" or "/100" (the scoring system)

The rotten code is wherever the Stage 1 prompt tells the model to "select" or "score" claims instead of processing ALL of them, and where it ignores the sentence-count constraint in custom instructions.
This file's problem: It rewrites section-by-section but doesn't preserve the exact format from Stage 1 output. The rewriteSection prompt doesn't enforce the custom instruction format requirements through to the final output.