Knowledge vs. awareness
Knowledge is conceptually articulated awareness. In order for me to know that my shoes are uncomfortably tight, I need to have the concepts shoe, tight, discomfort, etc. I do not need to have these concepts---or, arguably, any concepts---to be aware of the uncomfortable tightness in my shoes. My knowledge of that truth is a conceptualization of my awareness of that state of affairs.
Equivalently, there are two kinds of awareness: propositional and objectual. My visual perception of the dog in front of me is a case of objectual awareness, as is my awareness of the tightness of my shoes. My knowledge that there is a dog in front of me is a case of proposition- awareness, as is my knowledge that my shoes are uncomfortably tight.
 
Truths, not objects, the objects of explanation
Observations are objectual awarenesses. The contents of such awarenesses must be converted into propositions if they are to be explained. This is because it is truths that are explained, and truths are true propositions.
"But don't we explain events?" it will be objected. "Don't we explain bolts of lightning and avalanches?"
To explain some avalanche or lightning-bolt x is to explain why it is a truth that x occurred.
One is aware of lightning-bolts and avalanches. One explains the corresponding truths.
 
Causal relations known through observation
Causal relations can be known only through one’s senses (through sight, touch, etc.) and through real-time awareness of one’s own psychological processes. In other words, causal relations can only be known empirically; and knowledge of them is therefore empirical.
 
All theoretical knowledge inferential but not vice versa
Theoretical truths are necessarily known through inference, and knowledge of such truths is therefore inferential.
But not all inferential knowledge is theoretical knowledge. I notice that you look tired and on that basis know that you didn't get enough sleep. That knowledge is inferential but non- theoretical.
 
Theories and theoretical knowledge
A theory is given by a proposition that, if true, describes some relatively comprehensive fact about the structure of the universe.
Theoretical knowledge is either

(i)	Knowledge of such a theory (e.g. your knowledge of evolutionary theory)

or

(ii)	Knowledge that is derived from knowledge of such a theory (e.g. your knowledge that, the laws of mechanics being what they are and projectile x’s state of motion being what it is, x will collide with surface y in approximately two hours).
 
All knowledge justified true belief but not vice versa
If you know it, then

(i)	You believe it,
(ii)	It is true, and
(iii)	Your reasons for believing it are legitimate.

At the same time, given only that it's true and that you are justified in believing it, it doesn't follow that you know it. A broken clock is right twice a day. If your belief that it's noon is based on the read-out of a broken clock, it isn't knowledge, even if that clock happens to be right and, in addition, you know it to be relatively reliable.[2]
Your belief would have been knowledge had you acquired it by virtue of being en rapport
with the relevant realities; and the reason it wasn't knowledge is that it was not so acquired.
For you to be en rapport with those realities is for you to be linked to them by structures that are information-transmissive, as opposed to merely evidence-generative. The italicized terms will be presently defined and the justification for the just-made assertion will thereby become clear.
 
Propositions the objects of belief
The objects of knowledge are propositions. (It isn't known unless it's believed and it isn't believed unless it's a proposition.) One can be aware of non-propositions, e.g. rocks, trees, people, but one does not in the relevant sense know them. Rather, one knows truths about them.
 
Knowledge vs. awareness
Knowledge is conceptually articulated awareness. In order for me to know that my shoes are uncomfortably tight, I need to have the concepts shoe, tight, discomfort, etc. I do not need to have these concepts---or, arguably, any concepts---to be aware of the uncomfortable tightness in my shoes. My knowledge of that truth is a conceptualization of my awareness of that state of affairs.
To put it another way: There are two kinds of awareness: propositional and objectual. My visual perception of the dog in front of me is a case of objectual awareness, as is my awareness of the tightness of my shoes. My knowledge that there is a dog in front of me is a case of proposition-awareness, as is my knowledge that my shoes are uncomfortably tight.
