There are two broad types of relationships: formal and functional.
Formal relationships hold between descriptions. A description is any statement that can be true or false.
Example of a formal relationship: The description that a shape is a square cannot be true unless the description that it has four equal sides is true. Therefore, a shape’s being a square depends on its having four equal sides.

Functional relationships hold between events or conditions. (An event is anything that happens in time.)
Example of a functional relationship: A plant cannot grow without water. Therefore, a plant’s growth depends on its receiving water.

The first type is structural, i.e., it holds between statements about features.
The second is operational, i.e., it holds between things in the world as they act or change.

Descriptions as objects of consideration
The objects of evaluation are descriptions. Something is not evaluated unless it is described, and it is not described unless it can be stated. One can notice non-descriptions — sounds, objects, movements — but in the relevant sense one evaluates descriptions of them.

Relationships not known through direct observation
Some relationships are known, not through direct observation, but through reasoning. Such relationships are structural, as opposed to observational. Examples of structural relationships are:

If A, then A or B.

All tools require some form of use.

Nothing can be both moving and perfectly still.

There are no rules without conditions.

1 obviously expresses a relationship; 2–4 do so less obviously, as their meanings are:

2*. A tool’s being functional depends on its being usable.
3*. An object’s being both moving and still depends on contradictory conditions, which cannot occur together.
4*. The existence of rules depends on the existence of conditions to which they apply.

Structural truth and structural understanding
Structural understanding is always understanding of relationships. Observational understanding can be either direct or indirect; the same is true of structural understanding.