NEW REWRITE LOGIC. 

PROVISION 1: ALWAYS FOLLOW THE USER'S INSTRUCTIONS. 

PROVISION 2: IF USER GIVES INSTRUCTIONS AND ALSO SELECTS STYLE SAMPLE, FOLLOW INSTRUCTIONS AND WRITE IN THAT SAMPLE'S STYLE.

PROVISION  3: DO NOT EVER EVER EVER JUST TELL THE LLM TO "MAKE IT BETTER." DO NOT EVER EVER EVER JUST TELL THE LLM TO "MAKE IT SMARTER"  
HERE IS WHAT YOU DO. YOU USE ONE OF THE FOLLOWING STYLE SAMPLES, AND YOU REWRITE TO IN THE SAME STYLE. NOT IN A CARICATURE OF THAT STYLE, BUT IN THAT STYLE.  
YOU DO NOT TELL THE LLM "MAKE IT SMARTER", "MAKE IT BETTER" ETC. YOU SAY: MAKE IT LIKE THIS (REFERRING TO STYLE SAMPLE). DO YOU UNDERSTAND?

One cannot have the concept of a red object without having the concept of an extended object. 
But the word "red" doesn't contain the word "extended." In general, our concepts are interconnected 
in ways in which the corresponding words are not interconnected. This is not an accidental fact about 
the English language or about any other language: it is inherent in what a language is that the 
cognitive abilities corresponding to a person's abilities to use words cannot possibly be reflected in 
semantic relations holding among those words. This fact in its turn is a consequence of the fact that 
expressions are, whereas concepts are not, digital structures, for which reason the ways in which cognitive 
abilities interact cannot possibly bear any significant resemblance to the ways in which expressions interact. 
Consequently, there is no truth to the contention that our thought-processes are identical with, 
or bear any resemblance to, the digital computations that mediate computer-activity.

Sense-perceptions do not have to be deciphered if their contents are to be uploaded, 
the reason being that they are presentations, not representations. Linguistic expressions 
do have to be deciphered if their contents are to be uploaded, the reason being that they are 
representations, not presentations. It is viciously regressive to suppose that information-bearing 
mental entities are categorically in the nature of representations, as opposed to presentations, 
and it is therefore incoherent to suppose that thought is mediated by expressions or, 
therefore, by linguistic entities. Attempts to neutralize this criticism inevitably overextend the 
concept of what it is to be a linguistic symbol, the result being that such attempts eviscerate the 
very position that it is their purpose to defend. Also, it is inherent in the nature of such attempts 
that they assume the truth of the view that for a given mental entity to bear this as opposed to that 
information is for that entity to have this as opposed to that causal role. This view is demonstrably false, 
dooming to failure the just-mentioned attempts to defend the contention that thought is in all cases mediated 
by linguistic symbols.

It is shown (i) that causation exists, since we couldn't even ask whether causation existed unless it did; 
(ii) that any given case of causation is a case of persistence; and (iii) that spatiotemporal relations supervene on causal relations. 
(ii) is subject to the qualification that we tend not to become aware of instances of causation as such except when two different 
causal lines---i.e. two different cases of persistence---intersect, resulting in a breakdown of some other case of persistence, 
this being why we tend to regard instances of causation as fundamentally disruptive, as opposed to preservative in nature. 
The meaning of (iii) is that spatiotemporal relations are causal relations considered in 
abstraction of the various specific differences holding between different kinds of causation."

 
The meaning of morpheme (a minimal unit of linguistic significance) cannot diverge from what it is taken to mean. But the meaning of a complex expression can diverge without limit from what it is taken to mean, given that the meaning of such an expression is a logical consequence of the meanings of its parts, coupled with the fact that people are not infallible ratiocinators. Nonetheless, given Chomsky’s distinction between competence (ability) and performance (ability to deploy ability), what a complex expression means does, after a fashion, coincide with what it is taken to mean: to the extent that speaker-performance approximates to speaker-competence---i.e. to the extent that people are able to operationalize their linguistic competence---what speakers take complex expressions to mean coincides with they in fact mean; and herein lies an answer to the question “what is linguistic meaning?” that holds with respect to both simple and complex expressions.

On the basis of arguments put forth by (Kripke, 1977a) and (Kripke, 1980), it is widely held that one can sometimes rationally accept propositions of the form "P and not-P" and also that there are necessary a posteriori truths. We will find that Kripke's arguments for these views appear probative only so long as one fails to distinguish between semantics and presemantics—between the literal meanings of sentences, on the one hand, and the information on the basis of which one identifies those literal meanings, on the other. This same failure, it will be argued, underlies the popular thesis that intersubstituting co-referring terms sometimes turns true sentences into false ones and vice versa. Though seemingly plausible, this thesis has a number of counterintuitive consequences, among them that the occurrence of “snow” in “it is true that snow is white” doesn’t refer to snow. An understanding of the distinction between semantics and presemantics suggests a way to develop a semantic system that doesn’t have these consequences and that, moreover, reconciles our intuitions concerning cognitive content with some powerfully argued theses of contemporary philosophy of language. Some of this paper's main contentions are anticipated by Andrzej Boguslawski in his 1994 paper “Sentential Complementation and Truth.”.

"Jim would still be alive if he hadn't jumped" means that Jim's death was a consequence of his jumping. "x wouldn't be a triangle if it didn't have three sides" means that x's having a three sides is a consequence its being a triangle. Lewis takes the first sentence to mean that Jim is still alive in some alternative universe where he didn't jump, and he takes the second to mean that x is a non-triangle in every alternative universe where it doesn't have three sides. Why did Lewis have such obviously wrong views? Because, like so many of his contemporaries, he failed to grasp the truth that it is the purpose of the present paper to demonstrate, to wit: No coherent doctrine assumes that statements about possible worlds are anything other than statements about the dependence-relations governing our world. The negation of this proposition has a number of obviously false consequences, for example: all true propositions are necessarily true (there is no modal difference between "2+2=4" and "Socrates was bald"); all modal terms (e.g. "possible," "necessary") are infinitely ambiguous; there is no difference between laws of nature (e.g. "metal expands when heated") and accidental generalizations (e.g. "all of the coins in my pocket are quarters"); and there is no difference between the belief that 1+1=2 and the belief that arithmetic is incomplete. Given that possible worlds are identical with mathematical models, it follows that the concept of model-theoretic entailment is useless in the way of understanding how inferences are drawn or how they should be drawn. Given that the concept of formal-entailment is equally useless in these respects, it follows that philosophers and mathematicians have simply failed to shed any light on the nature of the consequence-relation. Q's being either a formal or a model-theoretic consequence of P is parasitic on its bearing some third, still unidentified relation to P; and until this relation has been identified, the discipline of philosophical logic has yet to begin.

In order to understand a sentence, one must know the relevant semantic rules. Those rules are not learned in a vacuum; they are given to one through one's senses. As a result, knowledge of semantic rules sometimes comes bundled with semantically irrelevant, but cognitively non-innocuous, knowledge of the circumstances in which those rules were learned. Thus, one must work through non-semantic information in order to know what is literally meant by a given sentence-token. A consequence is that one's knowledge of what is literally meant by a given sentence-token is sometimes embedded in non-semantic knowledge, resulting in a cleavage between what that sentence-token literally means and what the auditor in question takes it to mean. Such deviations obviously have nothing to do with the principles put forth by Grice, since those principles only concern sentence-tokens that have already been understood---since, to put it another way, those principles only concern post-semantic implicature. The just-described deviations are appropriately described as being due to "pre-semantic implicature." Given the phenomenon of pre-semantic implicature, it is easily shown that Russell's Theory of Descriptions, if taken as a theory of literal meaning, is false. In the present volume, these rather elementary principles are entirely ignored, and all of the articles in it are sterile repetitions of the points made by Russell and Strawson. The blinkered approach to language embodied in this volume must be reconsidered in light of psychological principles relating to language-acquisition and language-use. Unfortunately, analytic philosophers shy away from such topics, as is made clear by the papers in this grim volume


According to the computational theory of mind , to think is to compute. But what is meant by the word 'compute'? The generally given answer is this: Every case of computing is a case of manipulating symbols, but not vice versa - a manipulation of symbols must be driven exclusively by the formal properties of those symbols if it is qualify as a computation. In this paper, I will present the following argument. Words like 'form' and 'formal' are ambiguous, as they can refer to form in either the syntactic or the morphological sense. CTM fails on each disambiguation, and the arguments for CTM immediately cease to be compelling once we register that ambiguity. The terms 'mechanical' and 'automatic' are comparably ambiguous. Once these ambiguities are exposed, it turns out that there is no possibility of mechanizing thought, even if we confine ourselves to domains where all problems can be settled through decision-procedures. The impossibility of mechanizing thought thus has nothing to do with recherché mathematical theorems, such as those proven by Gödel and Rosser. A related point is that CTM involves, and is guilty of reinforcing, a misunderstanding of the concept of an algorithm

A series of representations must be semantics-driven if the members of that series are to combine into a single thought: where semantics is not operative, there is at most a series of disjoint representations that add up to nothing true or false, and therefore do not constitute a thought at all. A consequence is that there is necessarily a gulf between simulating thought, on the one hand, and actually thinking, on the other. A related point is that a popular doctrine - the so-called 'computational theory of mind' (CTM) - is based on a confusion. CTM is the view that thought-processes consist in 'computations', where a computation is defined as a 'form-driven' operation on symbols. The expression 'form-driven operation' is ambiguous, as it may refer either to syntax-driven operations or to morphology-driven operations. Syntax-driven operations presuppose the existence of operations that are driven by semantic and extra-semantic knowledge. So CTM is false if the terms 'computation' and 'form-driven operation' are taken to refer to syntax-driven operations. Thus, if CTM is to work, those expressions must be taken to refer to morphology-driven operations. CTM therefore fails, given that an operation must be semantics-driven if it is to qualify as a thought. CTM therefore fails on each possible disambiguation of the expressions 'formal operation' and 'computation,' and it is therefore false. 

Ordinarily counterfactuals are seen as making statements about states of affairs, albeit ones that hold in merely possible or alternative worlds. Thus analyzed, nearly all counterfactuals turn out to be incoherent. Any counterfactual, thus analyzed, requires that there be a metaphysically (not just epistemically) possible world w where the laws are the same as here, and where almost all of the facts are the same as here. (The factual differences relate to the antecedent and consequent of the counter-factual.) But, as I show, this requirement typically involves the positing of worlds whose necessary non-existence can be shown by fairly elementary deductions. Further, the possible-worlds analysis of counterfactuals is guilty of covert circularity. For, thus analyzed, counterfactuals can only be understood in terms of laws of nature (the laws that apply here are assumed in the hypothetical world - except in the atypical case where the counterfactual is also a counter-nomic). But there is widespread agreement that the concept of a law cannot itself be defined except in terms of the notion of a counterfactual (a law is inter alia something that supports counterfactuals). I give a purely epistemic analysis of counterfactuals, arguing that they are crypto-probability propositions. I also argue that the relevant kind of probability can be defined wholly in terms of what has happened (not what would happen and not even what must happen in a nomic sense). So my analysis isn’t guilty of any kind of circularity.

One of Kant’s main objectives is to show that there are necessary connections among the events that we experience. Hume said that there are sequences and regularities of events, but that there is never any kind of internal connection holding among them. For event x to cause event y is just for the sequence consisting of x followed by y to instantiate a general regularity.
         Hume’s analysis is counter-intuitive. It very much seems that pushing the button makes the computer turn on, that flipping the switch makes the light turn on. Understandably, Kant wanted to do justice to that intuition. He tries to justify this intuition with a transcendental argument. (Here I will give a transcendental argument for that view; whether it is Kant’s own argument, or even one he would consider credible, is an exegetical question I wish to avoid.) 
          Imagine a world where there is no causation, where there are merely sequences of events. Such a world would comprise nothing enduring. This is because persistence is itself a causal notion. If something persists, there is ipso facto a causal sequence of some kind. So where there is no causation, there is no persistence. Where there is no persistence, there is no coherent ideation. For surely, as a matter of necessity, a coherent thought process involves some kind of persistence. So given only the fact that there are beings who have the ability to raise questions about anything, let alone about the necessary preconditions for experience, it follows that causal relations do not consist in mere sequences of events, but in internal relations of some kind.  
        But notice that this transcendental argument turns on the existence of entirely analytic connections among propositions; no “synthetic a priori” is involved. Given the very concept of a rational thought process, it follows that analytically there are causal relations among events. The analyticity in question is hard analyticity, but it is analyticity no less. In the next section, I will attempt to show that Kant-style transcendental arguments are capable of settling some important questions concerning scientific explanation and knowledge in general. 

PROVISION 4: THE REWRITE ALWAYS BY DEFAULT ADDS CLARITY, ADDS LOGICAL AND/OR EMPIRICAL SUPPORT. 
UNLESS THE USER EXPLICITLY INDICATES OTHERWISE IN HIS CUSTOMIZED INSTRUCTIONS, THE REWRITE FUNCTION MUST NEVER EVER EVER EVER TURN EDGY PROSE INTO ANYTHING LESS EDGY. 
NLESS THE USER EXPLICITLY INDICATES OTHERWISE IN HIS CUSTOMIZED INSTRUCTIONS, THE REWRITE FUNCTION MUST NEVER TURN SHARP, CONCISE PROSE INTO ANYTHING THAT IS LESS SHARP/CONCISE. 

PROVISION 5: UNLESS THE USER'S INSTRUCTIONS EXPLICITLY SAY OTHERWISE, IF THE USER ENTERS NON-FICTION THAT IS NOT A COMPLETE ESSAY, THE REWRITE FUNCTION BY DEFAULT TURNS IT INTO A COMPLETE ESSAY. IF HE PUTS IN ONE NON-FICTION PARAGRAPH, OR A SERIES OF NON-FICTION PARAGRAPHS THAT ARE CLEARLY ONLY A FRAGMENT OF A COMPLETE ESSAY, THEN (UNLESS HE EXPLICITLY SAYS NOT TO TURN THE REWRITE INTO A COMPLETE ESSAY), IT TURNS IT INTO A COMPLETE ESSAY. 

PROVISION 6: UNLESS THE USER'S INSTRUCTIONS EXPLICITLY SAY OTHERWISE, IF THE USER ENTERS FICTION THAT IS NOT A COMPLETE STORY, THE REWRITE FUNCTION BY DEFAULT TURNS IT INTO A COMPLETE STORY. IF HE PUTS IN ONE FICTION PARAGRAPH, OR A SERIES OF FICTION PARAGRAPHS THAT ARE CLEARLY ONLY A FRAGMENT OF A STORY, THEN (UNLESS HE EXPLICITLY SAYS NOT TO TURN THE REWRITE INTO A COMPLETE STORY), IT TURNS IT INTO A COMPLETE STORY. 

PROVISION 7: PROVISIONS 1-6 HOLD FOR REWRITE MODE, RE-REWRITE MODE (I.E. REWRITE OUTPUT MODE), HUMANIZE MODE (IE GPTBYPASS MODE), AND REHUMANIZE MODE. 
