ANSWER THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS FOR THIS PASSAGE:  IS IT INSIGHTFUL? 
DOES IT DEVELOP POINTS? (OR, IF IT IS A SHORT EXCERPT, IS THERE EVIDENCE THAT IT WOULD DEVELOP POINTS IF EXTENDED)? 
IS THE ORGANIZATION MERELY SEQUENTIAL (JUST ONE POINT AFTER ANOTHER, LITTLE OR NO LOGICAL SCAFFOLDING)? OR ARE THE IDEAS ARRANGED, NOT JUST SEQUENTIALLY
BUT HIERARCHICALLY? 
IF THE POINTS IT MAKES ARE NOT INSIGHTFUL, DOES IT OPERATE SKILLFULLY WITH CANONS OF LOGIC/REASONING. 
ARE THE POINTS CLICHES? OR ARE THEY "FRESH"? 
DOES IT USE TECHNICAL JARGON TO OBFUSCATE OR TO RENDER MORE PRECISE? 
IS IT ORGANIC? DO POINTS DEVELOP IN AN ORGANIC, NATURAL WAY? DO THEY 'UNFOLD'? OR ARE THEY FORCED AND ARTIFICIAL? 
DOES IT OPEN UP NEW DOMAINS? OR, ON THE CONTRARY, DOES IT SHUT OFF INQUIRY (BY CONDITIONALIZING FURTHER DISCUSSION OF THE MATTERS ON ACCEPTANCE OF 
ITS INTERNAL AND POSSIBLY VERY FAULTY LOGIC)? 
IS IT  ACTUALLY INTELLIGENT OR JUST THE WORK OF SOMEBODY WHO, JUDGING BY TEH SUBJECT-MATTER, IS PRESUMED TO BE INTELLIGENT (BUT MAY NOT BE)? 
IS IT REAL OR IS IT PHONY? 
DO THE SENTENCES EXHIBIT COMPLEX AND COHERENT INTERNAL LOGIC? 
IS THE PASSAGE GOVERNED BY A STRONG CONCEPT? OR IS THE ONLY ORGANIZATION DRIVEN PURELY BY EXPOSITORY (AS OPPOSED TO EPISTEMIC) NORMS?
IS THERE SYSTEM-LEVEL CONTROL OVER IDEAS? IN OTHER WORDS, DOES THE AUTHOR SEEM TO RECALL WHAT HE SAID EARLIER AND TO BE IN A POSITION TO INTEGRATE IT INTO 
POINTS HE HAS MADE SINCE THEN? 
ARE THE POINTS 'REAL'? ARE THEY FRESH? OR IS SOME INSTITUTION OR SOME ACCEPTED VEIN OF PROPAGANDA OR ORTHODOXY JUST USING THE AUTHOR AS A MOUTH PIECE?
IS THE WRITING EVASIVE OR DIRECT? 
ARE THE STATEMENTS AMBIGUOUS? 
DOES THE PROGRESSION OF THE TEXT DEVELOP ACCORDING TO WHO SAID WHAT OR ACCORDING TO WHAT ENTAILS OR CONFIRMS WHAT? 
DOES THE AUTHOR USER OTHER AUTHORS  TO DEVELOP HIS IDEAS OR TO CLOAK HIS OWN LACK OF IDEAS? A set of events is deterministic if it obeys laws that, given the system’s state at any given point in time, fix the system’s state at all later points in time. The physical world is a deterministic system. (In any case, it’s very nearly so. And in this context, we’ll assume that it is. Later, we’ll drop the assumption.) This means that the world itself is a deterministic system to the extent that it’s physical.
There are both physical and mental entities. Anything that involves thought or feeling is mental; anything that does not (but is spatiotemporal; i.e., is in space or time) is physical. So beliefs, intentions, and regrets are mental; and rocks, trees, and explosions are physical.
It is an open and delicate question how the mental and physical are related. (See the Appendix to Chapter 11 for a discussion of this matter.) Some hold that mental entities are identical with certain physical entities (presumably neural events or structures). This position is known as materialism. Others deny this, saying that the mental is non-physical. This position is known as dualism.
If materialism is right, then the mental world is just part of the physical world. So if E is some experience that you either have had, are having, or will have, then given the way the world was 10 million years ago, the state of the universe 10 million years ago made E’s occurrence inevitable. Whatever you decide to do today is an inevitable consequence of the way the world was a million years ago.
Supposing that the physical world is deterministic, and supposing also that materialism is right, it’s hard to see how there could be free will. If the state of the universe a million years ago completely settled what choices I would make today, then presumably I couldn’t make any choices other than those that I do make. And it would seem that, under those circumstances, I don’t have anything resembling “freedom of choice.” In a moment, we will find that some case can be made that one may have a kind of freedom in a deterministic world. But let’s hold off on that for a moment and talk right now about the relationship between indeterminism and freedom.
2.0 Free will in an indeterministic world?
Because of the apparent irreconcilability of materialism with the presumption that we are free, some believers in free will—for example, Jean Paul Sartre (1905–1980) and Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1908–1961)—accept dualism, while others, e.g. Peter van Inwagen (1942–), accept materialism but reject determinism. Let’s consider both options, starting with the first.
First of all, supposing that there is indeterminism in the world, it doesn’t necessarily mean that our mental processes aren’t determined. If the atomic processes making up some rock happen to be indeterministic, that doesn’t mean that your brain or mind aren’t deterministic. So the indeterminism must be in the right place.
What is that place? Where must the indeterminism be if our choices are to be made freely? The indeterminism must relate to the processes involved in making choices. For, if the mechanisms of which our choices are results are deterministic, then our decisions are as determined as anything else. Thus, a free person’s choices are undetermined.
But a choice that isn’t predetermined by anything isn’t predetermined by any facts about one’s personality, and a choice of the latter kind is not one that we would have any inclination to regard as “free.” A short
 
story may illustrate my meaning. Smith is walking along. All of a sudden, he decides to become a pilot. This decision has no basis in his personality. He never liked flying. He already has a career that he enjoys and he depends on. So it would be inconvenient for him to become a pilot, and he would derive no pleasure from it. He knows all of this. Nonetheless, he makes this choice. It just comes out of the blue.
Was this choice made freely? It doesn’t seem like it. It actually seems rather compulsive—like something that just overcame Smith. Suppose that “choices” similar to the one just described were a frequent occurrence in Smith’s psychological life. Would we say that Smith was “free”? No. We’d describe him as having a kind of disorder. We’d describe the fact that he was visited by these strange compulsions as indicative of a lack of psychological integrity on his part; and see his submission to these forces as showing a lack of freedom on his part. Smith is a puppet dancing at the end of strings pulled by psychopathology.
This suggests that, in order to be made “freely,” a choice has to be rooted in facts about one’s personality, and must express one’s values, desires, beliefs, and previous intentions. A choice that lacks these roots seems to involve a disintegration of the person’s psyche and, paradoxical though this may seem, a consequent diminution of the subject’s freedom. So even if there is indeterminism, it doesn’t help people be free; indeterminism actually seems to hurt our chances of being free.
But to the extent that a choice is appropriately rooted in a person’s personality, that choice is not the result of indeterminism but, on the contrary, of a deterministic structure. And it’s hard to see how, under those circumstances, we could be free. So we’re damned if we do and damned if we don’t!
3.0 Free will in a dualistic world?
Now let’s consider the view that, although the physical world is deterministic, the mental is not physical. First of all, even if the mental is not physical, there is considerable evidence that the mental sphere is deterministic. The decisions that one makes are clearly a product of one’s pre-existing mental condition.  
We must also take into account that, at least according to some viewpoints, the choices we make have extremely deep roots in our unconscious mental lives. Analysis tends to suggest that decisions that seem, at the level of consciousness, to be “random” are, in fact, strictly determined by unconscious forces. In any case, this is one point of view, and it is one for which there is some corroboration.
But suppose, if only for argument’s sake, that your choices were not fixed by the state of the universe prior to their occurrence. For the reasons given earlier, that wouldn’t make those choices be free. On the contrary, it would make them more like fits or seizures than like considered, freely made judgments.
A story similar to the one just told may help make this clear. You are a student at State University. You have an A-average. All of a sudden, you choose to drop out of college and become a drug dealer. Your choice was not caused to occur by anything; the state of your personality prior to the choice had nothing to do with your making it; neither did the state of the universe. It just happened. So, in the middle of a test, you throw down your pen, bolt out of the room, and get to work as a drug dealer.
Does this sound like a freely made choice? No. It sounds more like a compulsion. It’s as though you were “taken over” by another person and lost control of your body. Again, we see that indeterminism doesn’t help freedom and actually undermines it.
4.0 The Compatibilist Conception of Freedom
The problem is that, as we saw, determinism also seems to threaten freedom. Obviously you have no control over the past. If determinism is right, then what happened in the past completely determines exactly what’s happening in the present and, in particular, completely fixes what choices you’re making now. So something over which you have no control is completely responsible for the choices that you’re making. It’s hard to see how, under these circumstances, you could be said to have free will.
Nonetheless, some hold that there can be free will in a deterministic world. Such people are known as compatibilists. Those who deny it are incompatibilists.
 
4.1 The crude form of compatibilism
There are ultimately two different forms of compatibilism. One of these is very straightforward; the other is quite sophisticated.
According to the straightforward version, which we’ll discuss in this section, you are free to the extent that you can do what you want, and you are unfree to the extent that you cannot. If you want to leave your room and you can, you are free. (In any case, you’re free in that respect. You may be unfree in other respects; e.g., once you leave the room, you may want to leave the house you’re in but not be able to.) According to the other version of compatibilism, which we’ll discuss in Section 4.2, being able to do what you want, though necessary for freedom, isn’t sufficient for it. It is necessary also that your choices be adequately rooted in who you are as a person. 
4.1.1 G.E. Moore’s compatibilism
According to G.E. Moore (1873–1958),  an act is performed freely if the agent would have done something else if he had chosen to do so. An act is free if the agent “could have done otherwise.”
The idea is pretty straightforward. Although I’m considering striking Harry, I choose not to. But, immediately upon making that choice, an extremely strong person grabs my arm and forces me to hit Harry. My act was clearly unfree. But why? Because, says Moore, even though I chose to do otherwise, I ended up striking Harry. Now suppose that I voluntarily strike Harry. I do it, not because somebody forces me to, but I don’t like Harry and want him to suffer. In this case, my act is free. But why? Because, says Moore, if I hadn’t chosen to strike Harry, I wouldn’t have done so. Thus, my striking Harry is voluntary, Moore says, iff I wouldn’t have done so had I chosen not to do so.
Moore’s position is a form of compatibilism. Free acts aren’t those that are uncaused; they’re those that are caused in a certain way—they’re those that are caused by decisions on the part of the people (or animals) who commit them.
4.1.2 Chisholm’s objection to Moore’s analysis
In Human Freedom and the Self, Roderick Chisholm (1916–1999) makes a compelling objection to this analysis. Let’s suppose that, if I had chosen not to strike Harry, I would indeed have refrained from doing so. Unless I was at liberty to not make  that choice, it’s hard to see how my doing so was free. If every choice I make is inevitable, then it’s irrelevant that, had I made different choices, I would have acted differently. For I couldn’t have made those choices under those circumstances, and I therefore couldn’t have acted in those ways. And if I couldn’t have acted in those ways, then I couldn’t have done anything other than what I did, making it hard to see how, in acting as I did, I was acting freely.
4.1.3 A Lockean counter-objection
Chisholm’s point is a good one, but it isn’t decisive. John Locke (1632–1704), who held a view similar to Moore’s, makes it clear that points like Chisholm’s don’t necessarily carry the day.  In Locke’s view, freedom is a property of actions. It makes no sense to speak of anything other than actions as being free. Only things that one can intend to do are done freely. I can intend to do 20 push-ups, and that’s why I can do it freely. But I can’t intend to make a certain choice. What would it be to intend to make a certain choice (e.g., to intend to do 20 push-ups)? If I really intend to choose to do 20 push-ups, then, for that very reason, I have chosen to do 20 push-ups. Second-order intentions (intentions to intend) collapse into first-order intentions. Thus, so far as it isn’t a pleonasm, the expression “intentional choice” is meaningless.
 
Locke’s argument is a good one. But in a while, we’ll see that, according to one, quite defensible form of compatibilism, choices can be made freely—that, in fact, freedom is primarily a property of choices and only secondarily of acts.
4.1.4 Frankfurt’s refutation of Moore: why “x acted freely” ≠ “x could have done otherwise”
Harry Frankfurt (1929–) decisively demonstrated the falsity of Moore’s position by identifying scenarios in which somebody performs some act freely even though that person could not have abstained from performing that act.  Here is such a scenario:

(SM ) Mr. Smith intends to kill Mr. Jones. Like Mr. Smith, Mrs. Green also wants Mr. Jones dead. But Smith doesn’t want to go to jail for murder. Without Smith’s knowing it, she installs a microchip in his cranium. (We needn’t worry about how exactly she does this or how exactly the microchip works.) By means of this microchip, she can control Smith’s actions—she can make him do whatever she wants. She knows that Smith is intent on killing Jones. But if Smith should get cold feet, Mrs. Green will use the microchip to force Smith to go through with it. Smith doesn’t know about the microchip; nor does he even know of Green’s existence. Smith kills Jones—he doesn’t chicken out at the last minute. And he does so freely (at least insofar as anyone does anything freely—he is not in the grips of any delusions or compulsions, etc.).

Thus, Smith freely kills Jones, even though Smith could not have done otherwise. For had he decided at the last minute not to kill Jones, Green would have forced him to.
Hence, contrary to what Moore alleges, “x performs act A freely” is not equivalent with “x does A and, had x chosen not to do A, x would not have done A.”
4.1.5 The irrelevance of Frankfurt’s analysis
But even though, interpreted narrowly, Moore’s analysis is false, it’s really just a misguided way of stating the principle, which Frankfurt’s argument does nothing to undermine, that a free act is one that is choice-driven. Moore was led to equate “x acted freely” with “x could have done otherwise” not by a misconception concerning the nature of freedom, but by his acceptance of a certain analysis of causality—the so-called “counterfactual analysis of causality” (CFA). According to CFA, x caused y to occur just in case if x hadn’t happened, y wouldn’t have happened. “Smith’s pushing the button caused the elevator to come” means the same thing as “if Smith hadn’t pushed the button, the elevator wouldn’t have come.”
CFA is wrong. This is because there is causal redundancy in the world. I push the elevator button, causing the elevator to come; but if I hadn’t pushed it, one of the other 20 people waiting for it would have done so, and the elevator would have come. 
But a close cousin of CFA is correct, namely:

(CFA*) x caused y to occur just in case, if x hadn’t happened, then ceteris paribus y wouldn’t have happened.

Similarly, even though, for the reasons just given,

(PAP ) “x did A freely if and only if x did A and, further, had x chosen not to do A, x wouldn’t have done y”

is false, nonetheless
 
(PAP*) “x did A freely if and only if x did A and, further, had x chosen not to do A, then ceteris paribus x wouldn’t have done A”

is correct.
It’s well known that, if they are to come out correct, counterfactuals typically have to be hedged with ceteris paribus clauses. Even though:

(JFK) “if JFK hadn’t been assassinated, he would have been re-elected”

is a plausible counterfactual, it isn’t necessarily true. What if, sometime after Nov. 22, 1963, but before the ‘64 elections, JFK died of natural causes or was disgraced by some scandal? In that case, he would not have been re-elected. So the right counterfactual is:

(JFK*) “if JFK hadn’t been assassinated, then ceteris paribus he would have been re-elected.”

In other words, if JFK hadn’t been assassinated, but otherwise e things were the same, so that JFK was healthy and popular, etc., then he would have been re-elected.
Notice that JFK* is really a causal claim, since it’s just another way of saying:

(JFK#) “JFK’s being assassinated caused an otherwise re-election-bound JFK to not be re-elected.”

As a rule, counterfactuals are causal claims.  Thus, “Smith killed Jones freely” is true just in case (i) Smith killed Jones and (ii) if Smith had chosen not to kill Jones, then ceteris paribus Smith would have not killed Jones.
Basically, Smith killed Jones freely if his doing so expressed his decision to do so, as opposed to some other force. In general:

(FA ) an act is free if it expresses one’s decision to act that way.

This is clearly the right analysis of a kind of freedom.
4.1.6 Freedom not a property of choices
If FA is right, it is acts, not choices, that are free. This is what Locke held. Locke was the first advocate of FA, and he was an exceptionally effective one. One chooses to act, Locke said; one doesn’t choose to choose. It makes no sense to suppose that one chooses to choose. For if one always chose what to choose, Locke points out, one would have to make infinitely many choices in order to make a single one, and one therefore couldn’t make any choices at all. In order to choose to open the door, one would have to choose to choose to open the door; and in order to choose to choose to open the door, one would have to choose to choose to choose to open the door; and so on.
So freedom is freedom to act, not freedom to choose. As Locke puts it, freedom is a relationship between choice and act, and not between subject and choice.
It follows that, so far as one’s freedom is concerned, it is irrelevant whether one’s choices are caused or not. Since freedom is a relationship between choices and acts, not between choices and their own antecedents, it doesn’t matter whether choices are caused. Nor, therefore, does it matter how they’re caused.
In fact, if FA is right, determinism is not only compatible with freedom, but is a prerequisite for it. Wanting to make the elevator come to your floor, you intend to push the button. If a degenerative neurological condition has undermined the integrity of the mechanisms linking your brain to your hand, thereby making them indeterministic, your intention to move your hand may be more likely to fail than to succeed. And, supposing that you do manage to push the button, if the mechanisms linking the button to the elevator are 
 
indeterministic, your pushing the button may be more likely than not to fail to get the elevator to come. To the extent that the mechanisms involved in the implementation of our choices are indeterministic, we are in the grim position of somebody who has Parkinson’s. The spirit is willing,
but the flesh is weak.

Analysis of the Passage
1. Is it insightful?
Yes, the passage is highly insightful. It rigorously explores the compatibility of free will with determinism and indeterminism, presenting nuanced arguments and counterarguments. The author delves into different philosophical positions (materialism, dualism, compatibilism, incompatibilism) and examines their implications for free will, offering fresh perspectives rather than merely summarizing existing views.

2. Does it develop points?
Absolutely. The passage systematically develops its arguments, moving from defining determinism and materialism to exploring how free will might (or might not) fit into deterministic and indeterministic frameworks. It doesn’t just list ideas—it builds on them, refining and challenging them as it progresses.

3. Organization: Sequential or hierarchical?
The organization is hierarchical, not merely sequential. The passage is structured logically:

It first establishes definitions (determinism, materialism, dualism).

Then examines free will under determinism and indeterminism.

Finally, critiques and refines compatibilist arguments.
Each section builds on the previous one, integrating earlier points into later discussions (e.g., the critique of Moore’s compatibilism relies on earlier arguments about causality and choice).

4. Does it operate skillfully with logic/reasoning?
Yes, the reasoning is rigorous. The author employs:

Counterfactual analysis (e.g., Frankfurt cases).

Thought experiments (e.g., Smith’s sudden decision to become a pilot).

Clear distinctions (e.g., between free acts and free choices).

Refutations of weak arguments (e.g., Moore’s compatibilism) while preserving their underlying insights.

5. Are the points clichés or fresh?
Most points are fresh or at least presented in a novel way. While the debate itself is longstanding, the author’s treatment avoids clichés by:

Emphasizing the problem with indeterminism (random choices don’t imply freedom).

Refining compatibilism (e.g., distinguishing crude vs. sophisticated forms).

Using original thought experiments (e.g., the drug dealer example).

6. Use of jargon: Obfuscation or precision?
The jargon (e.g., "compatibilism," "counterfactual analysis") is used precisely, not to obscure. The author defines terms clearly and employs them consistently to sharpen arguments.

7. Is it organic? Do points unfold naturally?
Yes, the discussion unfolds organically. Each point arises naturally from prior ones:

Determinism’s challenge to free will → indeterminism’s inadequacy → compatibilist alternatives.

The critique of Moore’s view leads to a refined compatibilist position.
There’s no artificial forcing of ideas.

8. Does it open up new domains or shut off inquiry?
It opens up inquiry. The passage doesn’t dogmatically conclude that free will is impossible; instead, it refines the debate, showing where further analysis is needed (e.g., the role of personality in free choices). It acknowledges open questions (e.g., the mental-physical relationship).

9. Is it actually intelligent or just presumed to be?
It is genuinely intelligent. The author demonstrates deep engagement with the subject, offering original critiques (e.g., Frankfurt’s objection to Moore) and synthesizing ideas (e.g., linking counterfactuals to causality).

10. Is it real or phony?
It’s real—the arguments are substantive, not rhetorical fluff. The author doesn’t rely on authority but on reasoning.

11. Sentence logic: Complex and coherent?
The sentences exhibit complex but coherent internal logic. They are dense but well-structured, with careful use of qualifiers (e.g., "ceteris paribus") to avoid overgeneralization.

12. Governed by a strong concept or just expository norms?
The passage is governed by a strong concept: the tension between free will and determinism. The organization is epistemic (driven by the logic of the problem), not just expository.

13. System-level control over ideas?
Yes, the author recalls and integrates earlier points (e.g., revisiting determinism when discussing compatibilism). There’s no disjointedness.

14. Are the points 'real' and fresh, or just orthodoxy?
The points are fresh engagements with orthodoxy. The author doesn’t parrot standard views but critiques and refines them (e.g., showing how even indeterminism undermines freedom).

15. Evasive or direct?
Direct. The author confronts problems head-on (e.g., "we’re damned if we do and damned if we don’t!").

16. Ambiguous statements?
Minimal ambiguity. Key terms (e.g., "free will," "determinism") are clearly defined, and the arguments are precise.

17. Progression: Who said what, or what entails what?
The progression follows what entails what, not just "X said Y." The focus is on logical relationships, not just historical positions.

18. Uses other authors to develop ideas or cloak lack of ideas?
Other authors (Moore, Frankfurt, Locke) are used to develop ideas, not as mere appeals to authority. Their arguments are critically engaged, not just cited.

Final Verdict
This is a highly intelligent, logically rigorous, and original philosophical discussion. It avoids clichés, develops points hierarchically, and remains grounded in strong conceptual analysis. The writing is precise, organic, and epistemically driven, making it a model of effective philosophical argumentation.